Clarify ACK of ACKs and bundling a PING (#2794)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

### Sending ACK Frames

Packets containing only ACK frames are not congestion controlled, so there are

> limits on how frequently the can be sent.  An endpoint MUST NOT send more than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limits on how frequently they can be sent.  An endpoint MUST NOT send more than
```

one packet containing only an ACK frame per received ACK-eliciting

> packet(one containing frames other than ACK and/or PADDING).  An endpoint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
packet (one containing frames other than ACK and/or PADDING).  An endpoint
```

> send a packet containing only an ACK frame in response to a non-ACK-eliciting

Reviewer 3: So if the stack _really_ wants to ACK some non-ACK-eliciting packet, ACK+PING is ok?  And if ACK+PING is not ok, then ACK+MAX_DATA(repeat latest value) is ok?

My point is that maybe this MUST ought to be replaced with a SHOULD to avoid people having to play these games, when they really want to do so.  (SHOULD still means do it unless you have a great reason not to.)

Reviewer 3: The text about not bundling PING (& friends) with every ACK is for the sender of only-ACKs.

The question here is about the receiver of only-ACKs.  Presumably such endpoint has just sent a train of packets, and when it received an ACK for all the packets, it has nothing more to send.  At that point, it may wish to ACK the last ACK w/o waiting for the receiver to send it ACK+PING.  Would that be sane behavior?  I think so.  But if the sender bundles ACKs for ACKs in packets with data, the receiver will hold at most 1-rtt worth of state, so it is not that bad I guess.

Reviewer 4: What if change the requirement to simply not ACK'ing ACK's too often. That would also do away with PING feedback loops. It seems that we are just moving the problem.

Author: The existing text follows what TCP does as closely as I can manage, which I think is the best prior art we can follow here.

> non-ACK-eliciting packet(one containing only ACK and/or PADDING frames),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
non-ACK-eliciting packet (one containing only ACK and/or PADDING frames),
```

packet gaps which precede the received packet. This prevents an indefinite
feedback loop of acknowledgements, which may prevent the connection from ever
becoming idle. The endpoint MUST however acknowledge non-ACK-eliciting packets

> when sending ACK frames in response to other packets.

Reviewer 3: Is "The endpoint MUST however acknowledge non-ACK-eliciting packets when sending ACK frames in response to other packets." necessary?  This is simply saying that ACK frames should ACK received packets.

Reviewer 4: I think so - it may not be technically required, but it would be unclear to a new reader whether non-ack-eliciting packets should be acked, and if so, how.

Reviewer 4: Oh, I think I suggested that before and @ianswett said the peer might want to control when to receive ACK's.

Author: We can say it differently, but it's important to say somewhere that non-ACK-eliciting packets are ACKed when an ACK is sent.

Reviewer 4: that Oh, ... comment landet the wrong place - I responded elsewhere

> What if change the requirement to simply not ACK'ing ACK's too often. That would also do away with PING feedback loops. It seems that we are just moving the problem.

and this is what the comment was an update to.

### Sending ACK Frames

An endpoint sends ACK frames to acknowledge packets it has received and
processed. Sending ACK frames is the primary mechanism for advancing the state

> of a connection.

Reviewer 5: This second sentence seems unnecessary.

Packets containing only ACK frames are not congestion controlled, so there are
limits on how frequently they can be sent.  An endpoint MUST NOT send more than

> one packet containing only an ACK frame per received ACK-eliciting packet

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
one ACK-frame-only packet in response to receiving an ACK-eliciting packet
```

(one containing frames other than ACK and/or PADDING).  An endpoint MUST NOT
send a packet containing only an ACK frame in response to a non-ACK-eliciting
packet (one containing only ACK and/or PADDING frames), even if there are

> packet gaps which precede the received packet. Limiting the sending of ACK

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
packet gaps which precede the received packet. Limiting ACK
```

> frames avoids creating an indefinite feedback loop of acknowledgements,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
frames avoids an infinite feedback loop of acknowledgements,
```

> which could prevent the connection from ever becoming idle. The endpoint MUST

Reviewer 5: I don't think you need this MUST here. How about "The endpoint however includes acknowledgements for any non-ACK-eliciting packets as normal when it receives and acknowledges an ACK-eliciting packet."

however acknowledge non-ACK-eliciting packets when sending ACK frames in

> response to Ack-eliciting packets.

Reviewer 6: s/Ack-eliciting/ACK-eliciting/

### Sending ACK Frames

> An endpoint MUST NOT send more than one packet containing only an ACK frame per

Reviewer 7: FWIW, the point of my previous comment https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/2794#discussion_r295118147 was that "MUST NOT send more than one packet containing only an ACK frame" does not prohibit one from sending a packet that contains ACK and PADDING.

This is admittedly a nit-pick, but discussing ACK-only on the send side while discussing ACK+PADDING on the receive side is confusing.

Hence the suggestion to change the text to "MUST NOT send more than one non-ACK-eliciting packet per ..."

> received non-ACK-eliciting packet(ie: one containing only ACK and/or PADDING

Reviewer 7: Maybe "MUST NOT send more than one non-ACK-eliciting packet in response to one non-ACK-eliciting packet"?

The packet the endpoint sends can also be a combination of ACK and PADDING.

Reviewer 4: This could get messy with timeouts and retransmissions. You may want to ensure that peer has ACK but there might not be space in a packet being retransmitted.

Author: This text is actually backwards, fixing it to remove the non

> PADDING).  An endpoint MUST NOT send a packet containing only an ACK frame in

Reviewer 7: s/MUST NOT send a packet containing only an ACK frame/MUST NOT send a non-ack-eliciting packet/.

Reviewer 4: yeah I thought of that one - but didn't say anything because you are discussing send ACK's. But to correct yes, it needs to include PAD.

Author: I'm not sure that change is correct.  ACK only packets don't count towards congestion control, so they're somewhat special.  I'd be curious to have @janaiyengar opinion on this.

> frames).  An endpoint MUST NOT send a packet containing only an ACK frame in

Reviewer 7: Here also.

receiver. Therefore, a sender SHOULD ensure that other frames are sent in
addition to PADDING frames to elicit acknowledgments from the receiver.

> An endpoint that is only sending acknowledgements will not receive

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An endpoint that is only sending ACK frames will not receive
```

> acknowledgments from its peer unless those acknowledgements are included in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
acknowledgments from its peer.
```

Author: Isn't the existing text more accurate(minus the sender/endpoint change)?

> packets with ACK-eliciting frames.  A sender SHOULD bundle ACK frames with

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD bundle ACK frames with
```

other frames when there are new ACK-eliciting packets to acknowledge.

> When only non-ACK-eliciting packets need to be acknowledged, the sender MAY

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When only non-ACK-eliciting packets need to be acknowledged, an endpoint MAY
```

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

> An endpoint that is only sending ACK frames will not receive acknowledgments

Reviewer 7: Maybe s/only sending ACK frames/only sending acknowledgements/.

Author: Done

receiver that is only sending ACK frames will only receive acknowledgements

> for its packets if the sender includes them in packets with ACK-eliciting

Reviewer 8: An endpoint that is only sending ACK frames won't receive acknowledgments from its peer unless those acknowledgements are included in packets [...]

Author: Done.

> for its packets if the sender includes them in packets with non-ACK frames.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for its packets if the sender includes them in packets with ACK-eliciting frames.
```
cover PADDING-only (as pointless as it might seem).

Author: This section is the only use of ACK-eliciting, so I define it at the beginning of the section now.

frames.  A sender SHOULD bundle ACK frames with other frames when possible.

To limit ACK Ranges (see {{ack-ranges}}) to those that have not yet been
received by the sender, the receiver SHOULD track which ACK frames have been
acknowledged by its peer. The receiver SHOULD exclude already acknowledged
packets from future ACK frames whenever these packets would unnecessarily
contribute to the ACK frame size.  When the receiver is only sending non

> ACK-eliciting packets, it can bundle a PING with a fraction of them, such as one

Reviewer 8: non-ACK-eliciting?

as one per round trip, to enable dropping unnecessary ACK ranges and any state
for previously sent packets.  The receiver MUST NOT bundle a PING with all
packets that would otherwise not be ACK-eliciting, in order to avoid an

> indefinite feedback loop of ACKs.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
indefinite feedback loop of acknowledgements.
```

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

Because ACK frames are not sent in response to ACK-only packets, a receiver that
is only sending ACK frames will only receive acknowledgements for its packets if
the sender includes them in packets with non-ACK frames.  A sender SHOULD bundle
ACK frames with other frames when possible.

To limit ACK Ranges (see {{ack-ranges}}) to those that have not yet been
received by the sender, the receiver SHOULD track which ACK frames have been
acknowledged by its peer. The receiver SHOULD exclude already acknowledged
packets from future ACK frames whenever these packets would unnecessarily
contribute to the ACK frame size.  When the receiver is only sending ACK-only
packets, it can bundle a PING with a fraction of them, such as one per round
trip, to drop unnecessary ACK ranges and any tracking state associated with the
previously sent ACK-only packets.  The receiver MUST NOT bundle a PING with all

> packets that would otherwise be ACK-only, in order to avoid an indefinite

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets that would otherwise not be ACK-eliciting, in order to avoid an indefinite
```
PADDING+PING

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

> An endpoint that is only sending ACK frames won't receive acknowledgments from

Reviewer 4: won't -> will not

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

An endpoint that is only sending acknowledgements will not receive
acknowledgments from its peer unless those acknowledgements are included in
packets with ACK-eliciting frames.  A sender SHOULD bundle ACK frames with

> other frames when possible.

Reviewer 8: Maybe instead:

> Though it sending an ACK frame in every packet can be inefficient, a sender SHOULD send ACK frames in ACK-eliciting packets that it sends.

Which leads to a difficult question: how often do you send an ACK frame when you aren't receiving ACK-eliciting packets?  We've agreed to make it possible to use the specs to build an "decently performant" stack.  Is this a point that isn't important, or is there a need for specific advice?

Reviewer 3: > How often do you send an ACK frame when you aren't receiving ACK-eliciting packets?

The text above ("An endpoint MUST NOT send a packet containing only an ACK frame in response to a non-ACK-eliciting packet") suggests a resolute "never", unless you bundle it with some useless ACK-eliciting frame. (See my comment above.)

The text here is suggesting that when a stack is sending a packet with an ACK-ecliciting frame, it should include an ACK frame for the previously unacknowledged non-ACK-eliciting packet.

Reviewer 8: Yes, that is always the problem case.

To limit ACK Ranges (see {{ack-ranges}}) to those that have not yet been
received by the sender, the receiver SHOULD track which ACK frames have been
acknowledged by its peer. The receiver SHOULD exclude already acknowledged
packets from future ACK frames whenever these packets would unnecessarily
contribute to the ACK frame size.  When the receiver is only sending

> non-ACK-eliciting packets, it can bundle a PING with a fraction of them, such

Reviewer 3: By the way, the PING has an additional behavior requirement that it is ACKed ASAP, unlike other ACK-eliciting frames.  Bundling a PING forces the other endpoint to be slightly less efficient in its packet sending.  There are other alternatives/hacks like MAX_DATA(repeat latest value) that elicits ACKs but does not imply immediacy (and since it is a repeat, it does not require retransmission on loss, just like PING).

Reviewer 3: You are correct. I remember we had a discussion about doing so, but I also do not see it landing anywhere.  So this PING as an example of what can be done sounds good.  But "MUST NOT bundle a PING" in the following sentence looks like normative language, and PING is not longer just an example there.

Maybe you want to write: "MUST NOT make every otherwise non-ACK-eliciting packet ACK-eliciting, in order to ..." or "MUST NOT add an ACK-eliciting frame to every otherwise non-ACK-eliciting packet, in order to ...".

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

> ### Limiting ACK ranges

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
### Limiting ACK Ranges
```

Strategies and implications of the frequency of generating acknowledgments are
discussed in more detail in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

### Limiting ACK ranges

To limit ACK Ranges (see {{ack-ranges}}) to those that have not yet been
received by the sender, the receiver SHOULD track which ACK frames have been
acknowledged by its peer. The receiver SHOULD exclude already acknowledged
packets from future ACK frames whenever these packets would unnecessarily
contribute to the ACK frame size.  When the receiver is only sending
non-ACK-eliciting packets, it can bundle a PING with a fraction of them, such

> as one per round trip, to enable dropping unnecessary ACK ranges and any state

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
as once per round trip, to enable dropping unnecessary ACK ranges and any state
```

for previously sent packets.  The receiver MUST NOT bundle a PING with all
packets that would otherwise not be ACK-eliciting, in order to avoid an

> indefinite feedback loop of acknowledgements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
infinite feedback loop of acknowledgements.
```
